we grow up surrounded
by tangible cultural artifacts
and intangible cultural values and we're
trained to believe
from our earliest childhood forward that
these artifacts
that these values are intrinsic
unquestionable transcendental
necessary to our lives as human beings
or necessary to the future of our
culture our nationality
our creed grew up walking around
downtown toronto
the opera really the ballet
we have a ballet company in downtown who
who goes to the ballet
here here in victoria canada that's the
same thing the government pays
millions of dollars to keep this opera
company going to keep this
ballet theater going really really
oh no no no you can't question it these
cultural institutions these cultural
artifacts
no matter how many millions of dollars
people pour into them no matter how
no matter how many of millions of your
dollars of taxpayers dollars
you can't question this is inviolable
unquestionable sacrosanct he says some
kind of innate value
even if nobody goes to see it so what
none of your friends have ever been to
the ballet
you've never heard of anyone no one's
ever told it was a good ballet or a good
up that's not the point
it's unquestionable you can't question
it to a very
significant extent the discourse
surrounding
habitat conservation you may say the
most
practical aspect of the philosophy of
nature it's put in this same
hallowed unquestionable sacrosanct
category and now for more than 20 years
i've been trying to drag it out of that
unquestioned unthinkable category
and get people to really think about it
so about four years ago i was talking
about this a lot within
veganism as a movement i got a question
from a long time viewer today
and he says he's been watching every
single video i uploaded for
for years but i'm guessing it's two
years or three years because he hasn't
seen
the last videos i made on this topic the
video i'm making today is in response to
questions that came in from that viewer
but as you'll get the impression right
his questions were of a somewhat
different nature and my answer is going
to be significantly different from
anything i've
i've said about this before um it's not
an easy
question it's not a simple question it's
just a question that i already
thought about a great deal and struggled
with a great deal more than 20 years ago
so it seems simple to me
it seems simple to me because this is an
area of philosophy i was interested in
for such a long time such a long
starting such a long time ago
and that i have dealt with again and
again face to face with people now look
it's really important in dealing with
these
sacrosanct unquestionable cultural
values in our societies
it's really important to point out no
the value of these things
is just decided politically it's just
determined
by 12 people wearing suits and ties
in a parliament building or if you live
in a dictatorship it might be
12 people wearing suits and ties in some
military bureau or some kind of people
there's no problem with no elections
but ultimately human beings sit down at
a desk
it's not that many human beings and
there's not that much democratic
participation there's not that much
transparency there's nothing
but some human beings sit down at a desk
and decide
how much is this opera really worth how
how much are we putting into the ballet
this year and it can be any number it
can be zero
and it can be 10 million it could be 30
million it could be billion
this is just a political decision and
you can regard this
as having cultural value and you can
train yourself
to perceive that value as innate in
these things
but
how much should a school teacher's
salary
be in canada i confronted
a professor about this let me tell you
something i won i won this debate
there were not two sides to this
argument um the
this professor kept referring to school
teachers in canada
as being underpaid that they were paid
less than what they would be paid
naturally meaning the free market
mean what what does nature mean in this
context and i this was kind of sort of
socratic method
i confronted her on this and ultimately
the only conclusion because i pointed
out to her i said
there is no natural salary there is no
natural price for what school teachers
get paid this
is something entirely created by a
political process
preferably a democratic political
process but quite likely an
arbitrary political process where for
example
the teachers have some politicians on
their side they have some lawyers
hired by their union and they demand a
certain amount of money
and then there are 12 or 15 politicians
who sit down in a room
and they decide how much money they're
going for it is 100
a political decision there is no role
for nature in this equation we're
dealing entirely
with the theater of human created values
values that human beings impose
on the natural world and if you keep
doing it from your earliest childhood
till the day you go to your grave you
start to see these things as having
intrinsic value but your your you really
just demonstrating the extent to which
your brain washed
um this is not to say
that i'm claiming teachers are paid too
much or too little in canada
my point is if you're going to make that
argument you can't appeal to a natural
price
to compare to what those teachers are
currently being paid you can't just
appeal to what they're really worth
as something known or knowable now you
tell me
what are elephants worth if you live in
a poverty-stricken
country like laos tiny poverty-stricken
country just north of cambodia
could use cambodia as an example we
could use sri lanka as an example we
could use
myanmar what what are what are the
elephants worth what are the monkeys
worth
the last tigers they got some
exotic jungle goats you ain't even heard
of like the spindle horn
endangered species they got uh they got
lorases
very charming creatures vaguely resemble
a monkey but in terms of evolution
what's what's it worth what's it worth
and you're sitting there with a finite
budget
as the government you got to worry about
the military
health care you're in a country when i
live there
medical doctors are being paid 15 us
dollars a month
right so they're all corrupt all every
doctor has to take bribes
because the salary the kept in the
government is embarrassingly low
the whole society is corrupt due to this
kind of
systemic underpayment of government
employees how how much
how much your elephant's worth and
that's just if i'm asking the question
in terms of the government paying for
the opera
paying for the ballet paying for these
other things
we we value assuming i'm not even
factoring in
the opportunity cost that's a technical
term in economics
the opportunity cost is if you value
these elephants if you value these
monkeys if you value these trees if you
value this habitat
that they they rely on that's going to
cost you way more money
because it means you have to sit there
and say no
this japanese charcoal corporation
wants to cut down the forest get a lot
of money from the wood
and then plant this particular type of
mass mono crop
that gets grown very quickly and turned
into charcoal briquettes
to export to japan so they can grill
fish on
huge huge business oh there's this other
company that wants to mine gold whatever
the example may be
uh there was a little bit of gold mining
in laos when i was there and they would
come up with all these excuses as to why
the gold mine justified cutting down
jungle
remarkably far away from the globe i
remember i remember a forest being cut
down
um to build a golf course and i was very
upset about it i talked to some
government officials
and i remember this is not the only case
instead they said look man if you've
been out there
i said trust me that forest has already
been cut down
they said trust me this it may be forced
on the map if you go
don't worry they're building that golf
course over a parking lot there's
nothing there
in any case um what are these things
worth many of us are trained
from birth to regard the forest as a
kind of
temple to regard nature as a kind of
cultural product paradoxically to regard
elephants as if they are statues
and in the same way that we justify the
government having a budget for
museums what do museums exist for
to preserve and present something
beautiful
for human consumption for human
delectation for human enjoyment
right you don't want to know you don't
want to know how many millions of
dollars your government is wasting on
museums
um my point
is not to say that elephants are
worthless that's not my
perspective my point is to say we're
just we're just dealing with my
perspective and your perspective and
human perspectives
the terrifying reality is that there are
12 or 15 people
in expensive suits who are going to make
this decision and who already have made
this
decision in the country you're living in
right now right
which species can be hunted and which
are protected
they sit there and look at a map and
they take a pencil and they outline the
area where it's illegal to cut down
trees
and they outline the area where all the
trees are going to be cut down and
harvested for lumber
right so this is with almost no
exceptions what i've just described is
is a global phenomenon this is the
reality of government
and it's the it reflects the profoundly
political nature
of nature itself in the 23rd century
that the value of nature is going to be
arrived at by small numbers of people in
positions of
political power preferably
democratically
preferably with with some transparency
right
now from my perspective
the budget for the ballet is very
difficult to justify
the budget for the opera is very
different difficult to justify and i got
to say something
if i live in toronto canada
i'm looking at the ballet and i'm
looking at the opera and i'm saying
if you shut this down it will leave the
world
no poorer nothing will be lost
there there is nothing of value that
will be irretrievably lost
it is not that we will be snuffing out
the great
canadian tradition of third-rate
imitations of italian culture
nothing is going to be lost here right
now by contrast
i have a totally separate genre of
videos where i'm talking about the
importance of trying to motivate the
canadian government
to have education for indigenous
languages to languages like
the inuit language cree ojibwe mohawk
in the united states navajo first
nations languages india
if you allow those languages to go
extinct
they're good gone forever and something
really is lost
right there is actually a very different
difficult interesting question to be
asked what if we allow our indigenous
culture
to go extinct because that doesn't exist
in italy and doesn't exist in germany
and then i think people have to sit in a
room make a very different set of
decisions
about government government funding for
the arts which
98 of government funding for the arts in
canada is a scam that should be
abolished that's
horrifying what's done with taxpayers
money in the name of
the arts but of course already there we
have a significant
shift in terms of the underlying values
and the palpable real world objectives
and the consequences
of the decisions we make if we don't pay
to preserve this right
the most fundamental criterion
that differentiates the elephants from
the ballet dancers
that differentiates all these questions
of habitat conservation
conservation of wild species from the
questions of merely human
cultural preservation
is that nature by definition is
self-instantiating and self-sustaining
all right the point is the forest
left to its own devices will regenerate
and even expand the forest
we don't have to do that for it okay
you would not believe how much money it
takes
just to keep a painting on the wall from
rotting
you would not believe how much money
your government is spending right now
to maintain churches and cathedrals
and synagogues you have no idea if you
walk through you just think oh it's a
stained glass window
you know what it takes to preserve a
window that's more than 500 years old
you know what it takes to sustain
mosaics and paintings that are on you
know
paintings normally they're made of egg
white and egg yolk by the way
you know the actual materials the
painting are made of they don't last for
a thousand years you know
it's not made it's not made out of steel
and guess what steel doesn't last for a
thousand years
all of these you know things you can
take for granted as inert
that's sitting around you even you know
ancient cultural artifacts that are made
of solid stone
like stonehenge in england you want to
look up how much money
it takes to create the illusion of
stasis
just to make those things sustainable
for human beings to still be able to see
and
touch that cultural heritage or that
history
all right left to its own devices
nature will reproduce itself restore
itself expand itself
right and the works of man
will degenerate into dust
if you've seen other videos on my
channel you know when it comes to
the catholic church the whole legacy of
the dark ages
i think there are a lot of institutions
we really have to have the
self-discipline
now to stop paying money to sustain
stop paying money to restore and rebuild
we have to have the maturity to let them
finally degenerate into dust all right
and then there are other decisions we're
going to make
where we decide hey the plays of william
shakespeare
still have some meaning and some well if
it's the modern world we're not ready to
let go of that
um there's a
species of monkey in yunnan
that eats almost nothing
but moss and lichen they're like called
like leica novores
okay it's very beautiful and
haunting sort of monkey
cute cute too the indigenous people
of that part of yunnan regarded them as
quite literally
the ghosts of the dead now the behaviors
of these monkeys along with their
somewhat ghastly appearance uh all
contributed to this cultural tradition
they have no nose they're noseless
monkeys so they have slits
just like looking at a human skull i'm
sure this is part of what inspired the
indigenous people
so you seem to be looking at a living
human skull and most of their bodies as
adults uh
the fur is black but the face
and sort of like a wreath around their
wisps of white
and when humans go past um just
behaviorally
they'll come down from the trees and
just stick their face
through the trees to look at you out of
curiosity because they can recognize
that you as a human
are something not so different from so
you get these ghastly white faces
coming out of the forest to look at you
with curiosity and they have no noses
they have these
just nose slits on this pale white face
looking at you so the indigenous people
there
thought of these as the spirits of their
own dead ancestors spirits of
you know human beings reincarnated or
just not even reincarnated
they just regarded these as ghosts
walking the earth
now obviously i do not accept
the cultural value that that culture in
the past
imposed on that animal as the last time
i read about it
in their natural habitat those monkeys
were down to their last tree
there was really one last tree and one
last tiny piece of habitat
and the problem is what their evolved
for what they're used to is collecting
this stuff like moss and lichen
over a huge area you can imagine they've
got to be able to go over that huge area
without being attacked by dogs
dogs can run them down and tear them to
shreds especially if they can't run up a
tree to escape
they're all these terrifying problems
and it's just teetering
on the brink of extinction and um
we can keep them alive in zoos that's no
problem i've seen them in zeus
you know can you sustain the habit can
you draw a line on the map and say no
this far no further for human
civilization you can use the trees up to
a certain point and then it's got to
stop
all right now if you can do that
it's it's so little to ask we get to
live in a world
with these monkeys and in sri lanka i
mean i can remember
getting out of a car at the side of the
road and the elephant was right there
where human beings were really living
among wild elephants not tame dolphins
they also live among
tamed elephants another story but you
know having wild elephants
and monkeys and to have this you know
surrounding you all right
when we're not even really questioning
what is it worth what do we have to
justify in terms of government policy
in the same ways with the opera and the
ballet we're just
asking is this meaningful enough
is this valuable enough to justify the
government drawing that line on the map
and saying no more
this is the end of human civilization
human civilization has some value
and it's finite and it's ultimately the
job of
a small number of people in a room in
positions of political authority
to define exactly where it starts and
stops exactly where it ends
and to say these things in nature
whether it's a monkey
or a mouse you know it doesn't have to
be something so photogenic as a
as an elephant it may be you know these
things
don't exist for our entertainment for
our edification
like pictures in a museum right
nature exists for itself
all right and we we also we
as humans can recognize we exist for
ourself we don't need some further
justification or purpose
for our existence but that existence is
finite
it's not that we can't use a hundred
percent of the land
mass of china or 100 the land mass of
sri lanka
laos cambodia or even can it's not that
we can't
it's that we shouldn't it's that
ultimately
there is an infinite infinite difference
between managing to sustain those few
trees
in that one park so that that population
of monkeys can regenerate
if you're talking about elephants you
know to say oh no okay
this last forest god knows that's the
situation in cambodia
laos northeastern thailand you know very
often you're down to your last little
patch
oh no no no it's not that
it's only a one percent difference to go
from 99
extinct to 100 extinct something
is lost there that human beings can
never make again
all right we can close down the opera we
can close down the ballet and you know
what maybe in the next 20
years fashions change
and people in canada are once again
fascinated with italian opera the way
they were in the 1920s
and you know what people go out and rent
a venue and start performing opera again
there's a new hit movie
the new hit youtube videos with opera
and ballet fine
you know you can people can go into the
library and blow the dust off the
manuscripts
and start performing opera again right
you can bring that back
20 years from now or 200 years from now
it almost seems inevitable that it'll
happen at some point
um right
once a language goes extinct it's gone
forever
you can never bring it back right the
there's something
that happens with a mother transmitting
a language
to a child that can never be reproduced
with a chalkboard in a textbook
right there's there's something about a
language that's lost forever
when it's driven to extinction there's
something about
elephants there's something about
walruses there's something about
mice whatever the species may be right
when you take that step to drive it to
extinction right it can never be
brought back and of course that's not
just because of the genetics
involved it's not just because of the
continuous succession of animals living
in the wild and
transmitting their instincts and
experiencing it's because of the habitat
all right you can burn down the church
and you can build another church that's
what they're doing right now in paris
france with rebuilding the notre dame
cathedral
um you can never
rebuild the wilderness you can never
replace
the wild once it's gone